---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 25
verse: 29
enTitle: The Bond, or Bundle, of Life
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe וַיָּ֤קׇם אָדָם֙ לִרְדׇפְךָ֔ %}
{% vtr And a man rises to pursue you %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וּלְבַקֵּ֖שׁ אֶת־נַפְשֶׁ֑ךָ %}
{% vtr and to seek your soul, %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וְֽהָיְתָה֩ נֶ֨פֶשׁ אֲדֹנִ֜י צְרוּרָ֣ה ׀ %}
{% vtr but the soul of my lord will be bound up %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe בִּצְר֣וֹר הַחַיִּ֗ים אֵ֚ת יְהֹוָ֣ה אֱלֹהֶ֔יךָ %}
{% vtr in the bundle of life with <i>Adonai</i> your God – %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וְאֵ֨ת נֶ֤פֶשׁ אֹיְבֶ֙יךָ֙ יְקַלְּעֶ֔נָּה %}
{% vtr and the soul[s] of your enemies He will sling %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe בְּת֖וֹךְ כַּ֥ף הַקָּֽלַע׃ %}
{% vtr from within the hollow of the sling. %}
{% endverses I Samuel 25:29 %}

- I immediately recognized this verse as the inspiration for {{ 'תנצב"ה' | he: 'T.N.Ts.B.H.' }}, the acronym inscribed on Jewish headstones. The phrase in full is used during the Yizkor service, a set of prayers said by immediate relatives of a deceased person on major holidays:
{% verses %}
{% vhe תְּהֵא נַפְשׁוֹ/נַפְשָׁהּ צְרוּרָה בִּצְרוֹר הַחַיִּים %}
{% vtl T’hei nafsho/nafshah ts’rurah bitzror hachayim %}
{% vtr May his/her soul be bound up in the bundle of life %}
{% endverses Yizkor 6 %}
- In resources online, this is often translated as “the bond of eternal life.” These sources seem to basically all be geared towards non-religious Jews in mourning confused over the symbols on their loved ones’ gravestones – meaning they don’t provide much history or reasoning. For that reason, I always found the phrase a bit mysterious.

<!--more-->
- I always assumed the intended interpretation was that this in some way represented the state of the soul after death, although the idea of “eternal” did not seem to obviously follow from the text and I wasn’t sure exactly what “bundle” meant.
- After doing some more research, I think the intended interpretation is that it indeed represents the period of physical connection of a righteous person’s soul to God that occurs between death and the Messianic age (when traditionally the souls of the righteous will be restored to their bodies, and they will live eternally in paradise on earth). <a href="https://he.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=%D7%AA%D7%94%D7%90_%D7%A0%D7%A9%D7%9E%D7%AA%D7%95_%D7%A6%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%94_%D7%91%D7%A6%D7%A8%D7%95%D7%A8_%D7%94%D7%97%D7%99%D7%99%D7%9D&oldid=42518092">Hebrew-language Wikipedia</a> (the only easily-accessible source to me that even attempts to explain the origin of this phrase as far as I can find!) cites the Talmud ({{ 'Shabbat 152b:7' | sefaria }}) and the medieval Rabbi Maimonides, AKA Rambam, (<a class="sefaria-link" href="https://www.sefaria.org/Mishneh_Torah%252C_Repentance.8.3">Mishneh Torah, Repentance 8:3</a>) to support this interpretation.
- What helped me understand this metaphor is in part the former source, which draws a parallel between the metaphor in this verse of slinging away the souls of David’s enemies, and what happens to non-righteous souls – i.e. that their souls are sent away from the presence of God, rather than bundled together with Him like the souls of the righteous are.
- I think seeing this phrase translated as “bundle,” rather than “bond” or “bond of eternal life,” also helped. The latter always evoked contracts and agreements to me, which seemed not to fit with the idea of being “bound up” – but the former makes it clear that these are souls bound in a bundle together, and with God.

- *Honorable Mention:* I find the way Abigail simply “lets” God act, whether through her speech to David, or in the way “she” kills her husband, fascinating. To me it feels like an inversion of the way David’s actions typically relate to God’s actions: he seems to be portrayed as the main actor, with the fact that it was really God’s doing as an extra detail – but Abigail seems to be portrayed as not an actor at all, and yet in the details she seems to have quite a lot of agency.
