---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 21
enTitle: Judaism for the State Is Weird
---

- I forget that even though Rabbinic Judaism operates almost entirely through prayer, blessing, and personal rituals, Judaism for thousands of years (i.e. the Judaism of the Sadducees, and of this book’s period) operated more like a branch of government. Priests were officials who provided holy services to the public and other public servants, consecrating objects and actions, providing blessings when needed, and reconciling you with heaven at certain times of year or after transgressions.
- When the religious topic is God, I can relate to the characters – their Judaism is recognizable to me. But when the religious topic is the actions of the priesthood, I find it much more difficult, and can’t really reconcile it with the Judaism I know.

<!--more-->
- Like, this idea of consecrated bread being provided as one of many supplies needed for an army on the move, or the fact that David’s notable spoils of war are entrusted to priests and kept in a holy place instead of kept in an armory – I can’t imagine modern Judaism behaving like this!
- Not only is the idea of consecrating an object and in some way ‘changing it’ through prayer a taboo in Rabbinic Judaism, but the concept of religion being a service provided to you rather than something that *you* must do is antithetical to what this type of Judaism is all about.
- I wish I could grumble about the current era of Judaism containing a worrying potential return to this status quo in the State of Israel, but I’m not sure I can. Although there are prominent religious extremists and right-wing politicians using religion in Israel to justify apartheid and their attempts at genocide, until that attitude takes over, Israel remains a Jewish state in the secular/ethnic sense, not in the religious sense. Reverence and prayer for soldiers and warfare, although personally troubling to me, has a long history – however it is worth saying that as the diaspora continued my understanding is that the Rabbis got less and less comfortable with this idea, mostly due to a series of failed rebellions and conflicts that caused a lot of Jews to channel all their hopes into an ultimately fruitless, and deadly, activity.
