---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 11
enTitle: The State of Israel and Jephthah
tags: fav
---

- The diplomatic negotiation between *Yiftach* (Jephthah) and the Ammonites, as with many passages in Joshua, reminds me of arguments used to defend the modern State of Israel.
<!--more-->
- *Yiftach*’s letter recalls how as the Israelites were fleeing bondage they asked many different nations to pass through their land, but no nation would accept. Finally, as they were near the land of the Amorites and once again asked for passage, the Amorites not only denied Israel but raised an army to stand against them. The Israelites not only successfully defended themselves against this army, but continued the conflict and went on to take and occupy much of the land of the Amorites – much more land than what they currently were sheltered upon. He argues that land taken this way is valid. He also tacks on two more arguments: one about their God giving them this land, and the other about them having already occupied the land without contest for many years.
- Both in the lead-up to World War II and in the wake of the Holocaust, many European nations either had explicit policies barring Jewish immigration, or extremely hostile cultural attitudes against it. Many Jewish refugees therefore fled Europe and immigrated to Palestine. As more and more Jews immigrated, anti-semitism and xenophobia rose among the local population and Jews faced increased violence and segregation in the territory. Eventually there was armed conflict, and after many years of continued conflict, the Jewish coalition seized and occupied much of Palestine for themselves – much more land than what parts of Palestine the Jewish immigrants had fled to – founding the State of Israel. Some use this as an argument for the validity of the land taken for the State of Israel. Another argument is that it was given by God, and yet another still is simply that it has existed without successful challenge for many years.
- Obviously, not everything is a perfect parallel. Although in both cases the response to violence is conquest, in *Yiftach*’s letter the enemy raises an army first, but in the case of Israel, it is the Jewish coalition that raises an army first. Additionally, *Yiftach*’s letter claims the Jews have occupied that land for 300 years with no challenge, while the State of Israel has not even existed for a generation – and its borders have in fact fluctuated multiple times due to repeated challenges.
- I have to say, I don’t find either main argument particularly convincing. Certainly, seizing land during a conflict sparked from self-defense is better than waltzing in and doing so unprovoked – but you’re still seizing and occupying land that has up to now been someone else’s home!
- The argument about God has no place in diplomacy, in my opinion, but the argument about the land being settled for many years I’m at least slightly amenable to. Forced migration is incredibly traumatic, and the longer people live in a land the more they take root. If a people have lived on a land for hundreds of years with no challenge, then I think they should rightfully be able to stay there. Which is why the complete dissolution of the State of Israel at this point feels worse and worse to me every year. But, of course, this argument applies just as well to the Palestinians who had been occupying the land for over a thousand years before anyone had even thought of the idea of a Jewish State! The Jewish immigrants’ decision to seize and occupy extensive amounts of land for themselves (far more than what they were sheltering on in the moment of conflict) is therefore even more of an indefensible position to me.

<!--break-->
- *Honorable mention:* The name {{ 'יִפְתַח' | he: 'Yiftach', 'Jephthah' }} is a classical Bibcal Hebrew name, in that it is the third-person masculine perfect conjugation of a verb relevant to the story of the character. In this case it’s {{ 'פתח' | he: 'patach', 'open' }}, making the name literally “he opened. This refers to him opening his mouth and making a promise that he must keep.
