---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 7
enTitle: Thoughts on Interacting with the Text
---

- I feel like there are two ways of interacting with the text that are interesting to me – one I feel like I’m good at doing, but the other I am not exactly sure how to do.
<!--more-->
- The former is thinking about the text as a historical document, and trying to read in between the lines to discern what the author is not saying about what actually happened. For example, Alter points out that the name “Gideon” is etymologically related to his later actions, and the etymological argument used for his secondary name “*Yeruba’al*” is tenuous – and thus, perhaps the latter was actually his birth name, and “Gideon” was the name he chose or was given after him saving *Yisrael*. The implications of him, during this period where the Israelites were likely still defining themselves from among the larger Canaanite peoples, being born with an extremely pagan name and later changing it is fascinating to me.
- The latter is thinking about the text as a religious document, one that has been identified and preserved by my ancestors a source of God’s teachings. I’m really good at doing this for the *Torah*, perhaps because I’ve heard every portion analyzed year after year in new ways each time, so I have some footholds to use when finding my own interpretations. But for whatever reason, these stories stump me – but I’d like to think it’s just lack of practice. For example, I think there’s something to Gideon’s continued hesitance to trust that God will ensure his victory, and thus his repeated need for more tests and signs – and not only that – God’s preemptive comment of “if you are frightened” in this chapter. I think perhaps there’s also a connection to the way the soldiers are let walk away if they are afraid. But I’m not exactly sure where to go with these ideas next.

