---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 10
verse: 15
enTitle: A Striking Apology
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe חָטָ֔אנוּ %}
{% vtl Chatanu %}
{% vtr We sinned. %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe עֲשֵֽׂה־אַתָּ֣ה לָ֔נוּ %}
{% vtl ‘aseh atah lanu  %}
{% vtr You do to us %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe כְּכׇל־הַטּ֖וֹב בְּעֵינֶ֑יךָ %}
{% vtl kachol hatov b‘einecha %}
{% vtr whatever you see fit – %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe אַ֛ךְ הַצִּילֵ֥נוּ נָ֖א %}
{% vtl ach hatzilenu na %}
{% vtr but save us, please %}
{% endverses Judges 10:15 %}

- In the *Tanakh* the norm seems to be incredibly performative and flowery apologies. This absolutely bare-bones apology was therefore very striking to me – especially in contrast to God’s quite specific rebuke of their initial ask for salvation.
- Perhaps it indicates just how worn down the Israelites are during this occupation. They have no energy to apologize on their hands and knees – all they can do is plainly admit that they have done wrong, acknowledge that God may do whatever He wishes to them, and ask truthfully for help.

<!--more-->
- *Honorable mention:* God does not reply to this, instead the Israelites perform {{ 'תשובה' | he: 'tshuvah', 'repentance/return' }}, and then in {{ 'Joshua 10:16' | sefaria }}: {{ 'תִקְצַר נפשוֹ בעמל ישראל' | he: 'tiktzar nafsho ba‘amal Yisrael', 'His <i>nefesh</i> shortened with the suffering of <i>Yisrael</i>' }}. Alter translates this as “He could not bear the misery of Israel” – which is probably the best translation, since the idiom used in the Hebrew does not translate to something comprehensible to English readers. The word {{ 'נפש' | he: 'nefesh' }} could mean body, life, or soul (from most to least common) – making the idiom translate to something like: “his life shortened,” “his body weakened,” or “his soul weakened.” This makes perfect sense as an idiom for something becoming too much to bear… for a person! However, saying any of these things about God is strange. I have no further comments, it’s just interesting!
