---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 17
verse: 6
enTitle: “What Can You Do”
---

{% nowrapverses 95 %}
{% vhe בַּיָּמִ֣ים הָהֵ֔ם %}
{% vtl B’yamim hahem %}
{% vtr In those days %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe אֵ֥ין מֶ֖לֶךְ בְּיִשְׂרָאֵ֑ל %}
{% vtl ein melech b’yisra’el %}
{% vtr there was no king in <i>Yisrael</i>, %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe אִ֛ישׁ הַיָּשָׁ֥ר בְּעֵינָ֖יו יַעֲשֶֽׂה׃ %}
{% vtl ish hayashar b’einav ya’aseh. %}
{% vtr a man did what was right in his eyes. %}
{% endverses Judges 17:6 %}

- Aside from being a good summary of the core message most of this book (as Alter points out in his introduction), this sentence seems to serve two key purposes to me:
<!--more-->
- One, is as a way to express disapproval for the actions of Micah which immediately proceeded this verse (him making an idol). I read it as sort of a “Well, look… what can you do” response to Micah’s action. To be honest, I find it interesting the text feels the need to say anything at all – I feel like so far the text has simply let its characters perform bad actions with no comment, and respond by simply revealing their punishment later. I’m surprised it does not simply do that here. Perhaps the badness of the act of idolatry is so important to emphasize that the text feels compelled to make sure the reader knows that it is bad.
- The other is as a way to introduce the idea of a monarchy being needed at all! At least to me, so far the text has not seemed to make very compelling arguments in favor of establishing a monarchy. In fact, in the case of Avimelech, the text seemed to have an anti-monarchy message. I expect that as this book wraps up and the future monarchy gets closer, this sentiment will be increasingly at the forefront.
