---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 9
heTitle: משל
tlTitle: Mashal
enTitle: Parable
tags: fav
---

- This chapter contains {{ 'משל יותם' | he: 'Mashal Yotam' }}, the Parable of Jotham.
- The Hebrew word {{ 'משל' | he: 'mashal', 'parable' }} refers to a specific form of allegorical story, often framed as being told by an individual to a public assembly. Given the widespread familiarity with Jesus' parables from the Christian New Testament – which are examples of {{ 'משלים' | he: 'mashalim', 'parables' }} – the English word “parable” happens to work well as translation.
- Many online sources claim that this as the first {{ 'משל' | he: 'mashal' }} in the Hebrew Bible – it is certainly the first in Nach that I’ve noticed.
<!--more-->
- The same online sources as above usually also claim that this tree-based story is sometimes told on {{ 'ט״ו בשבת' | he: 'tu bish’vat' }}, the Jewish agricultural New Year prescribed in the *Torah* – which in modern times has become sort of a Jewish Earth Day where people plant trees. But, I could not find a source goes beyond just repeating the same one-sentence claim, and I've never heard of this tradition, so it may not be widespread or very old.
- The etymological connection between the word {{ 'משל' | he: 'mashal', 'parable' }} and the subject of the parable {{ 'מֹשֵל' | he: 'moshel', 'ruling' }}, is impossible for me to ignore. I can’t find anything which explains why these two words share the same root, but it’s interesting that they do. The latter word features repeatedly in [my notes on Judges 8]({% post_url nach-2024/Judges/2024-03-03-8 %}).
- Like the previous section, this reads to me as a warning against monarchy in general (i.e. those who would be good at being king don’t want to be, since they have other things for which they are needed – and those who want to be king will not be good, since what they really want is power and violence). It again makes me wonder under what circumstances a successful Israelite monarchy will be formed, and whether the assembler of this book views that as a positive or negative development.

<!--break-->
- *Honorable mention:* Yet another malicious ruler struck down by a woman using a household object as a weapon! For the text, it appears that this is viewed as a humiliation for the fallen – that their death came not a soldier, not even from a weapon. However, I choose to see it as further reinforcing that a victory through God is something that does not come through military might, but through all the people of the land, half of which are women, and most of which live domestic lives with no soldiers’ weapons at their disposal.
