---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 18
enTitle: Normalized Idolatry and Narratives
---

- This story is fascinating!!! In [my notes on Judges 17]({% post_url nach-2024/Judges/2024-03-12-17 %}) I wondered why the text specially called out Micah’s idol worship instead of simply letting the consequences of his actions speak for themselves. Now I know why: there are no clear consequences for idolatry in this story! (There are consequences for Micah in that he loses his idols, but that seems to be more a consequence of his theft and his mother’s curse than his idolatry, given that the Tribe of Dan seem to find only success and happiness after taking his idols.)
<!--more-->
- This story seems to reflect a time where, for at least a non-trivial subset of Israelite society, polytheism (albeit with YHWH as the supreme god) was the norm. In this story, Micah, the people who live in the houses around him, and the people of Dan all seem to share these beliefs, and the events of the story do not seem to condemn them.
- Historically, the broad scholarly consensus seems to be that various levels of this sort of polytheism was the norm for most of the history of the Israelite people. If I’m understanding correctly, scholars believe that it wasn’t until at least after King Ahab that the “official” state and priestly religion became strict monotheism, and even then it wouldn’t be until after the end of the Babylonian exile that the entirety of the Israelite population became strictly monotheistic.
- Again (see [my notes on Judges 3]({% post_url nach-2024/Judges/2024-02-27-3 %})), I personally find much more compelling the narrative that academics present of a people slowly finding their identity and their spirituality through experience, rather than the narrative that this text presents of a past ideological unity and clarity from which we are always falling away and to which we must return. To me, this latter narrative seems like the wish of those who have found the new way and want to share it with their people – a valiant goal, but the human-ness and nuance of the former narrative I don’t think should be erased.
- For me, it reminds me that I can grow into something better – something that I *should* have been all along, even if in truth, I wasn’t.
