---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 5
verse: 27
enTitle: Poetry in Every Word
tags: fav
---

{% scaledverses 90 %}
{% vhe בֵּ֣ין רַגְלֶ֔יהָ כָּרַ֥ע נָפַ֖ל שָׁכָ֑ב %}
{% vtl bein ragleha kara nafal shachav %}
{% vtr Between her legs he knelt, fell, lay %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe בֵּ֤ין רַגְלֶ֙יהָ֙ כָּרַ֣ע נָפָ֔ל %}
{% vtl bein ragleha kara nafal %}
{% vtr Between her legs he knelt, fell %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe בַּאֲשֶׁ֣ר כָּרַ֔ע שָׁ֖ם נָפַ֥ל שָׁדֽוּד׃ %}
{% vtl ba’asher kara sham nafal shadud %}
{% vtr Where he knelt, there he fell – dead. %}
{% endverses Judges 5:27 %}

- Aside from being beautiful poetry, which stretches out this moment of death by taking notice of each action, essentially every word in this verse has secondary meaning that I find fascinating.
- {{ 'רגליה' | he: 'ragleha', 'her feet' }} could just as well also mean “her legs.” However, this word is also sometimes used as a euphemism for genitalia. That’s not the case here, obviously, but to me it suggests that this verse is deliberately contrasting this extraordinary act of mortal violence committed by a woman to a man, with sexual violence committed by a man against a woman – the infinitely more common act to occur between a man and a woman during wartime.
<!--more-->
- {{ 'כָּרַע' | he: 'kara', 'kneel' }} comes from the same root as {{ 'כֶּרַע' | he: 'kera' }}, meaning “thigh.” To me, this could be further emphasizing his vulnerable position between her thighs.
- {{ 'שכב' | he: 'shachav', 'lay' }} is one of multiple Hebrew words meaning “to lie down,” but this one in particular is the one which can also be used as a sexual euphemism (“lie with”). Again, to me this is evidence that the text is deliberately contrasting this act with sexual violence.
- {{ 'שדוד' | he: 'shadud', 'dead' }} literally means “is ravaged,” “is plundered,” or “is robbed” – but I chose to go with “dead” to accurately reflect the tenseness of the Hebrew. To me, this word choice not only emphasizes how crushing of a defeat this is, but also the mercilessness of *Ya’el* – by using for her the same word used for raiding parties or robbers.

<!--break-->
- *From Hannah:* It’s like the poetic version of slow motion.

- *Honorable mention, adapted from Hannah:* While *Devorah* commands armies but does no violence herself, *Ya’el* remains in her own home but takes a man’s life with her own hands. Interesting comparison/contrast.

- *Honorable mention:* Another of the rare times the Tanakh gets special formatting! (See [my notes on Joshua 12]({% post_url nach-2024/Joshua/2024-02-12-12 %}).) This time it’s the “brick” pattern also used for the Song of the Sea. For examples, see this chapter [in the Codex Cairensis](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Cairo-codex-nevi%27im.pdf&page=44) and [in the Lenningrad Codex](https://commons.wikimedia.org/w/index.php?title=File:Leningrad-codex-07-judges.pdf&page=6).

- *Honorable mention:* Maybe this goes without saying (because I think I’ve known this for years) but this is potentially the oldest text included in the Bible. Alter even suggests that potentially it was composed right after the events it describes (!!), and although that there seems to be quite a bit of scholarly disagreement about exactly how contemporary it is, no one argues that it is very old.
