---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 15
verse: 1-2
enTitle: Untranslatable Grammar
tags: fav
---

{% nowrapverses 91 %}
{% vhe וַיֹּ֕אמֶר אָבֹ֥אָה אֶל־אִשְׁתִּ֖י %}
{% vtl vayomer avoah ‘al ishti %}
{% vtr And he said ‘Let me come to my wife’ %}
{% brdotsverses %}
{% vhe וַיֹּ֣אמֶר אָבִ֗יהָ %}
{% vtl vayomer aviha %}
{% vtr And her father said %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe אָמֹ֤ר אָמַ֙רְתִּי֙ כִּי־שָׂנֹ֣א שְׂנֵאתָ֔הּ %}
{% vtl amor amarti ki sano s’netah %}
{% vtr ‘I <b><i>said</i></b> that you <b><i>hated</i></b> her’ %}
{% endverses Judges 15:1-2 %}

- The starts of the two lines quoted above are spelled and pronounced almost identically in Hebrew: {{ 'וימאר אָבֹאָה' | he: 'vayomer avoah', 'and he said ‘let me come’' }} vs. {{ 'וימאר אָבִיהָ' | he: 'vayomer aviha', 'and her father said' }}. This striking, almost poetic, similarity makes their subsequent differences in tone and length even more apparent. Samson is blunt, and depending on your interpretation, crass. Her father is desperate, and sounds like he is caught off guard.
- What I'm translating as bold-italic text and others translate as the word “surely” is neither a change in Hebrew font nor a Hebrew word, but instead a Biblical Hebrew grammatical feature which doesn’t have any English analog: the infinite absolute verb form used emphatically.
<!--more-->
- For example, {{ 'אמרתי' | he: 'amarti' }} means “I said”. Combining it with the infinite absolute form of the same verb, you get {{ 'אָמֹר אמרתי' | he: 'amor amarti' }}, which is an intensified version of the same statement.
- However, this fails to capture the reduplicative aspect of this grammatical form. Ignoring conjugations, the father is essentially saying the word {{ 'אמר' | he: 'amar', 'said' }} twice, then the word {{ 'כי' | he: 'ki', 'that' }}, then the word {{ 'שנא' | he: 'sana', 'hated' }} twice. To me, it almost sounds like he’a stuttering or tripping over his words as he tries to formulate exactly what he wants to say. At the very least, by using this form twice is making quite a forceful plea to Samson.
