---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 12
verse: 6
enTitle: Sound Shifts in Semitic Languages
tags: fav
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe וַיֹּ֣אמְרוּ לוֹ֩ %}
{% vtl Vayomru lo %}
{% vtr And they would say to him: %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe אֱמׇר־נָ֨א שִׁבֹּ֜לֶת %}
{% vtl emar na shibolet %}
{% vtr “Please say: ‘<i>Shibolet</i>’” %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וַיֹּ֣אמֶר סִבֹּ֗לֶת %}
{% vtl vayomer sibolet %}
{% vtr And he would say: “<i>Sibolet</i>” %}
{% endverses Judges 12:6 %}

- I was actually just learning about sounds shifts in Semitic languages!! What’s relevant here is the Proto-Semitic phoneme ‘š’ (pronounced as “sh” in Hebrew). The main dialect of Hebrew has maintained this phoneme to this day, but in many other neighboring Semitic languages, it was merged into the ‘s’ phoneme (pronounced as “s” in Hebrew). 
- This exact sound shift happened in Arabic! Thus the equivalent word to {{ 'שִׂבֹּלֵת' | he: 'shibolet' }} in Arabic is {{ 'سنبلة' | he: 'sunbula' }}, pronounced with an “s” sound and not an “sh”!
- Note that Hebrew was not spared from sound shifts: The Semitic phoneme ‘ṯ’ was maintained in Arabic (pronounced as “th” in Modern Standard Arabic), but merged into the aforementioned ‘š’ phoneme in Hebrew. So, {{ 'ثَقُلَ' | he: 'thaqula' }} in Arabic has the corresponding word {{ 'שקל' | he: 'shaqal' }} in Hebrew – both meaning “weigh”.
- However, only one of these the two cases described above could actually be used a test in the vein of this story:
<!--more-->
  - A native Hebrew speaker would likely be revealed if asked to say {{ 'ثَقُلَ' | he: 'thaqula' }} by a native Arabic speaker. This is because Hebrew does not have any phoneme pronounced as “th,” and would likely not be able to convincingly replicate the sound without training.
  - On the other hand, a native Arabic speaker would likely pass the test if asked to say {{ 'שִׂבֹּלֵת' | he: 'shibolet' }} by a native Hebrew speaker. This is because although Arabic merged the ‘š’ phoneme into the ‘s’ phoneme, the distinct Semitic ‘ś’ phoneme[^1] (which merged into ‘s’ in Hebrew) is now pronounced as “sh” in Modern Standard Arabic. Even though an Arabic speaker would say the word differently in their language, they should be able to simply repeat the word back phonetically without any trouble.
- All this fun stuff aside, the conclusion is that the people of Ephraim were either going through a very common sound shift in their own dialect, or they picked it up from a neighboring Semitic language. Fun that I literally just learned about all of this!

[^1]: This phoneme is believed to originally be a [lateral fricative](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voiceless_dental_and_alveolar_lateral_fricatives#Dental_or_denti-alveolar), found in languages such as Welsh and Swedish.