---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 3
verse: 5-8
enTitle: First Non-Legendary Bit of History?
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe וּבְנֵ֣י יִשְׂרָאֵ֔ל יָשְׁב֖וּ בְּקֶ֣רֶב הַֽכְּנַעֲנִ֑י %}
{% vtr And the Children of <i>Yisrael</i> dwelled in the midst of the Canaanites %}
{% brverses %} {% vhe … %} {% vtr … %} {% brverses %}
{% vhe וַיִּקְח֨וּ אֶת־בְּנוֹתֵיהֶ֤ם לָהֶם֙ לְנָשִׁ֔ים וְאֶת־בְּנוֹתֵיהֶ֖ם נָתְנ֣וּ לִבְנֵיהֶ֑ם וַיַּעַבְד֖וּ אֶת־אֱלֹהֵיהֶֽם׃ %}
{% vtr And they took their daughters for themselves as wives, and to their sons they gave their daughters, and they served their gods %}
{% brverses %} {% vhe … %} {% vtr … %} {% brverses %}
{% vhe וַיַּעַבְד֥וּ אֶת־הַבְּעָלִ֖ים וְאֶת־הָאֲשֵׁרֽוֹת׃ %}
{% vtr and they served the Ba’als and the Asherahs %}
{% endverses Judges 3:5-8 %}

- Based on my understanding of the current archeological evidence, this is likely the first unequivocally true historical statement about the Israelites in the Hebrew Bible.
- My understanding is that the evidence points to the Israelites emerging naturally as a sub-group of the Canaanite people, and Judaism itself emerging naturally from a variant of the Canaanite religion which worships YHWH along with Ba’al and Ashura. Thus, this state of things (where the Israelites are a loosely defined group scattered throughout the Canaanites who worship some but not all of the same gods) is likely the *start* of the national history of a cohesive Israelite people, rather than a fall from a more unified past.
<!--more-->
- (It’s worth noting that although there is no evidence of a Israelite or Jewish exodus from Egypt, my understanding is that there are enough authentically Egyptian details in the story and in early Israelite culture that there must have been some sort of group who fled Egypt and assimilated with the Israelites. Thus my use of the word “unequivocally” above. Also I’m *sure* this is not the only asterisk, just the only one I know about.)
- I actually prefer the story that archeologists tell over the one presented here. The story presented here is one where things were once all as they should be today, but instead we have fallen from grace and must return to what we once had.
- The story that archeologists tell is one of growth: a people defining themselves, choosing what they believe in, and deciding to make something new if what they believe is right isn’t what’s in front of them. This story inspires me that we can one day build something better than we have, and gain more clarity and see more truth than we ever did before.

<!--break-->
- *Honorable mention:* Wow, the story of Ehud is just fantastically written. The way each step is revealed in turn makes the action so compelling, the use of {{ 'הנה' | he: 'hineh', 'here' }} to put you in the perspective of the guards, the usage of the same verb {{ 'תקע' | he: 'taka', 'thrust/blow' }} for his killing thrust as for his blowing of the shofar… ugh! It’s just a great story.

- Question: What is the theology of this story? It’s an incredibly engaging tale, but does it teach us anything unique about God?
