---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Judges
chapter: 2
heTitle: שפטים
tlTitle: Shoftim
enTitle: Are the “Judges” Judges?
---

- As Alter discusses in his comments to {{ 'Judges 2:16' | sefaria }}, but as I already knew, “judge” is not quite expansive enough of a translation for the word {{ 'שפט' | he: 'shofet'}}, the namesake of this book and which is used repeatedly within. He continues, saying that others will try to fix this by translating the word as “chieftain” (Sefaria even makes up a word: “judge-leader”), but will still inevitably fall short.
- The reason is that the notion of separating the government, the military, the legal system, and the church would not come for thousands of years, and thus any person in power would be expected to be the authority in all four – we simply have no word for such an expansive authority in English.
- For me, this explains why the commandments of the *Torah* consistently move beyond the religious or moral and into the civic, martial, and legal – any authority on the former was also expected to be an authority on the latter. Thus, they were inseparable.

<!--more-->
- *Honorable mention:* An angel! There haven’t been any angels in the entirely of Deuteronomy or Joshua, it makes me happy to see one mentioned again. Perhaps that was because neither Moshe nor Joshua needed an angel to speak with *Adonai*, but perhaps it was also just the literary preference of the author of Deuteronomy and/or the author of Joshua (who I believe the scholarship thinks are either the same, or the later is imitating the former).

- *Question:* Is this account of raising up Judges a summary of what is to come in this book, or a summary of what happened between Joshua’s death and the events of this book? Because based on Alter’s introduction it sounds like it could be a summary, but perhaps it’s just an indication that not every judge is recorded in this text.
