---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Joshua
chapter: 7
heTitle: לכד
tlTitle: Lachad
enTitle: Take
---

- Aside from regular usage, as in {{ 'Joshua 7:15' | sefaria }}: {{ 'הנִלכד בחרם' | he:  'hanilkad b’charam', 'the [things that] were taken from the ban' }}, the word is also used to imply being chosen from a drawing of lots, as in {{ 'Joshua 7:16' | sefaria }}: {{ 'וילכד שבט יהודה' | he: 'vayilached shevet y’hudah', 'and [he/it] took the tribe of Judah' }}. This latter usage of the word is backed up by {{ '1 Samuel 14:42' | sefaria }} (found via Sefaria’s dictionary).
- Although the scholarly consensus seems to be that this verb is used here to indicate the drawing of lots, no explicit mention of this is ever made. In fact, in the first verse that this verb appears, it always includes a subject: {{ 'Joshua 7:14' | sefaria }}: {{ 'ילכדנו יי … ילכדנה יי … ילכדנו יי' | he: 'yilk’denu Adonai … yilk’denah Adonai … yilk’denu Adonai', '*Adonai* will take [him/it] … *Adonai* will take [her/it] … *Adonai* will take [him/it]' }}. So, in my mind, the possibility of a more divine “selection” is not ruled out.

<!--more-->
- *Honorable mention:* As Alter mentions, {{ 'Joshua 7:11' | sefaria }} is a flurry of {{ 'וגם' | he:'v’gam', 'and also' }} which sounds very accusatory in the Hebrew! Like, a teacher scolding a student for everything they did wrong.

- *Question:* How in the world do we justify and learn something good from a story which ends so horribly. Even though it was because of random chance, the man came clean and not only was he publicly executed, but so was his family and all his possessions, and their bodies were desecrated.

### On Joshua 6-7 in general:

- How do you make sense of stories like this being in this Bible? They just so strongly seem to go against my own understanding of what God is trying to teach us in terms of compassion and understanding.
- Is it just that sometimes God’s will is cruel and violent? And Joshua and the Children of *Yisrael*, as symbolically extensions of God’s will, also are sometimes cruel and violent?
- But why did neither Joshua nor the Israelites object, like *Avraham* did to God’s initial fury over Sodom and Gamorah? It seems like the text wants faithful readers to see Yehoshua as a leader and the Children of *Yisrael* as themselves, but does that mean we should also see ourselves doing the same in their shoes?
