---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Joshua
chapter: 16
enTitle: Looking Ahead to Samuel
---

- I can’t think of anything much to add beyond what Alter mentions in his comments for this chapter, so instead, I peeked ahead and skimmed his intros for Judges and Samuel.
- I have to say I’m quite excited for Samuel. Not only does Alter describe it and Kings as containing a very compelling and personal multi-generational story, but by his assessment of the current scholarship, they represents the first books of the *Tanakh* which were written contemporaneously (i.e. were authored by someone who either lived through the events of the text, or used first-hand accounts of people who did).
<!--more-->
- It’s refreshing to see Alter’s doubts contained to whether aspects of events were mythologized or exaggerated, rather than covering the entirety of the text, as they do for Joshua, at least.
- As I’ve said before, Alter’s conclusion that Joshua is a highly revisionist (if not entirely imagined) story written by a very nationalist author is comforting, in the sense that it helps the, in my opinion, inexcusable commands of the God of Joshua sit better with me. However, it makes it harder for me to engage with the text as a religious work, as my tradition has done for thousands of years. Not having Alter’s doubt in the back of my mind will make reading Samuel a much more rewarding experience, I hope.
- It is worth mentioning, the only caveat to my “for thousands of years” comment is that the Prophets were not often studied unless you were an extremely learned scholar whose task was to preserve these texts for future generations. Only chapters 1, 2, and 8 are studied as part of the yearly *Haftarah* cycle, and learning *Nach* is not a part of traditional Jewish schooling (for men) at any level. Because of this, it is also valid to say that for thousands of years, most Jews, even learned Jews, simply did not know of the extent of the unpalatable parts of this book, and therefore never had to grapple with its consequences.
