---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Joshua
chapter: 11
enTitle: The Israel-Palestine Conflict and Joshua
---

- Despite continuing to read a chapter every day, I have been having a harder and harder time interacting with this text as each day passes. I think I figured out why: to me, this story parallels the current Israeli-Palesinian conflict in a very essential and troubling way.
<!--more-->

- One way to summarize this book so far is as follows: the Jewish people are returning to a land in which they have not lived for many generations, a land they believe is rightfully theirs by divine decree. Upon returning, they seize land by means of total destruction: not only killing all civilian inhabitants of captured cities, but also destroying (burning) all possessions, property, and signs of habitation – leaving each conquered city to be a “devastation to this day.” The book states that for one city, the death toll is given to be 12,000 – so overall tens of thousands are killed, the majority likely women and children. At one point 36 soldiers of *B’nei Yisrael* are killed, who the text expects us to mourn and whose deaths are used to justify continued violence against civilians and property. The text is either silent about, or revels in, the deaths of the Canaanites.

- The history of the modern State of Israel (*Medinat Yisrael*) is one of Jews returning to a land in which they have (by majority, but not totally) not lived for many generations, a land they believe is rightfully theirs by divine decree. Skipping past many decades of complex history, the parallels continue in the present conflict in Gaza. Implicitly in the official actions of the Israeli military, but explicitly in the language of most far-right Israeli politicians and many soldiers, the Israeli military is waging war in Gaza by means of total destruction: not only killing all civilian inhabitants of entire neighborhoods, but also destroying (bombing) homes, schools, buildings with hundreds of years of history, and cemeteries. Hundreds of neighborhoods are complete devastations, reduced entirely to rubble. Entire communities were killed in bombings, and other communities, of which there were survivors, will have nothing but rubble to return to when the war is over. The death toll is over 28,000, the majority women and children. The start of the conflict was, in part, because of the death of roughly 1,200 Israelis, mostly civilians, who were deeply mourned and whose deaths are used to justify heightened violence against Palestinian civilians. Among most Israelis, there is either silence about, or revelry in, the deaths of these Palestinian civilians.

- It is extremely important to remember that the parallels I draw between the 36 killed in *Yehoshua* and the 1,200 killed on October 7th are tenuous. The former are a small number of soldiers who died in a battle instigated by the Children of Israel. The latter are mostly civilians killed as part of a larger attack by Hamas on Israel, which also included the taking of hostages, and numerous atrocities including torture, rape, and mutilation. The only reason I make a comparison between these two things at all is because of the parallels in how they are responded to: mourning for the loss of brothers and sisters, and either silence about or revelry in the loss of the tens of thousands of “enemy” civilians.

- These parallels are all I see when I read this story now. And my own horror and objection to the program of total destruction of life conducted by the State of Israel is impossible for me to forget as I read *Yehoshua*. What makes it hard to read, however, is how in this story it is God is who leads, who commands, the Children of Israel to commit their program of total destruction. How can I object to the current violence – how can I believe that a God does not want the lives and homes of those who live in Gaza to be snuffed out – and also believe that this story is trying to teach me something true about the same God?

- The only conclusion I can reach is to reject this text in some form. De-elevate it to simply a book written by a man, with his own goals and within his own time period. Still an important and historical text, but one that merely teaches us about how this particular man thought about his nation and his God at his time, not anything deeper than that. I don’t know if I’m ready to do that, so I’m still looking for another way.

- If I do go that route, Alter’s introduction to *Yehoshua* (which I finally read yesterday), would provide me some solace. He talks about how the most likely historical reality is that none of this ever happened – the Israelites and the Canaanites lived side by side for hundreds of years, exchanging cultures, sharing bloodlines, and yes, sometimes waging war. But no campaign of total destruction ever occurred, and no fierce physical or genetic separation of “Israelite” vs. “Canaanite” ever occurred. The author was most likely writing this text not as a record of what was, but as a record of what the author wishes had happened, or perhaps, wishes *will* happen.

- If I don’t, then I either have to find a way to distinguish this story from the injustice I see happening by the hands of my people today, or reconcile the seemingly un-just God of *Yehoshua* with the God I think I know. I refuse to accept the actions of *B’nei Yisrael* in this story as justified, just as I refuse to view the actions of the State of Israel in Gaza as justified. The *Torah* teaches: “When you approach a town to do battle, … you shall [first] call to it for peace. … And if it does not make peace with you, … you shall strike down [only] all its males with the edge of the sword” ({{ 'Deuteronomy 20:10-13' | sefaria }}, Alter). Why does the God of *Yehoshua* not lead His people this way? I have yet to hear a reason that provides justification for ignoring such an act of human compassion.
