---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: Joshua
chapter: 24
verse: 18-19
enTitle: A Doubted Covenant
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe גַּם־אֲנַ֙חְנוּ֙ נַעֲבֹ֣ד %}
{% vtl gam anachnu na‘avod %}
{% vtr We too – we will serve %}
{% brdotsverses %}
{% vhe לֹ֤א תֽוּכְלוּ֙ לַעֲבֹ֣ד %}
{% vtl lo tuch’lu la‘avod %}
{% vtr You will not be able to serve %}
{% endverses Joshua 24:18-19 %}

- I basically gasped when I read this line. I was expecting the Children of *Yisrael*'s staunch commitment to serve *Adonai* (even emphasizing the “we”) to be met with the usual covenant formula, but to hear Joshua immediately rebuke their statement so plainly was shocking to me.
- It makes the covenant formula which follows it feel more… empty? reluctant? I don’t know the right word. It’s as if Joshua knows, after observing them for their entire wandering, that they will not hold their side of the covenant. However, he goes through with it anyway. I’m not sure what this means, but I find it fascinating.

<!--more-->
- Honorable mention: {{ 'עד' | he: '‘eid', 'witness' }} appears multiple times in this section. This word is thought of every time a Jew says the *Shema*, as the last letters of the first and last words of the Shema are enlarged, spelling {{ 'עד' }}. This is done to remind Jews that each of us are witnesses. (Whether that means we are witnesses to God, or witnesses to our covenant with God (if so which one?), or something else I’m not sure actually.) What’s interesting to me is the parallel to the Israelites’ single word declaration in {{ 'Joshua 24:22' | sefaria }}: {{ 'עדי' | he: '‘eidim', '[We are] witnesses' }}.
