---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 19
verse: 20
enTitle: Connotations of “Spirit of God”
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe וַתְּהִ֞י עַֽל־מַלְאֲכֵ֤י שָׁאוּל֙ ר֣וּחַ אֱלֹהִ֔ים%}
{% vtl va’t’hi ‘al mal’achi Sha’ul ruach Elohim %}
{% vtr and the spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וַיִּֽתְנַבְּא֖וּ גַּם־הֵֽמָּה׃ %}
{% vtl vayitna’b’u gam hema %}
{% vtr and they too spoke in prophecy %}
{% endverses I Samuel 19:20 %}

- Building off of the discussion in {% my_notes_on I Samuel 10 %} and {% my_notes_on I Samuel 18 %}, this chapter seems to cement the fact that the verb {{ 'התנבא' | he: 'hitnabe', 'speak in prophecy' }} has a negative connotation.
- In this case, the prophetic state is used almost as a weapon, exercised by Samuel on three of Saul's messengers as well as Saul himself. The way I read it, speaking in prophecy is a kind of affliction, sought out by the group of “prophets” overseen by Samuel, but which can befall and incapacitate anyone.
<!--more-->
- However, what I find most fascinating is the use of the phrase {{ 'רוח אלהים' | he: 'ruach Elohim', 'spirit of God' }}. When I first read this, I was surprised that a state so clearly linked to divine presence could have a negative connotation, but as a looking into how the term is used in this book, I became less surprised.
- Although in repeatedly in Judges and once in this book ({{ 'I Samuel 11:6' | sefaria }}) this phrase is used to indicate the act of God choosing the next leader of *Yisrael*, the phrase appears to be most commonly associated with madness in this book. Specifically, a {{ 'רוח אלהים רעה' | he: 'ruach Elohim ra‘ah', 'evil spirit of God' }} is repeatedly said to come over Saul ({{ 'I Samuel 16:16, 18:10, 19:9' | sefaria }}) and once, in {{ 'I Samuel 16:23' | sefaria }}, the final word is dropped, and Saul's madness is caused by simply {{ 'רוח אלהים' | he: 'ruach Elohim' }}.
- Perhaps the fact that this phrase seems to be neither inherently good or bad is indicative of the relationship to God that the Israelites had at this point in history. They clearly view God as the sovereign of all things, but treat God mostly as a force of nature. God's interventions are portrayed as frequently chaotic or violent, and not personal or predictable.
- Thus, perhaps the state of one's voice being overcome with God's presence was similarly viewed as a chaotic, violent, and unpredictable. Perhaps this is why it is so un-befitting for a king to be “among the prophets” ({{ 'I Samuel 19:24' | sefaria }}).
