---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 10
enTitle: Speaking Ecstatically or Prophesying?
---

- The verb {{ 'התנבא' | he: 'hitnabe' }} is used repeatedly throughout {{ 'I Samuel 10:5-13' | sefaria }}. Alter, JPS, and many others all translate this as “speaking ecstatically,” i.e. “speaking in tongues.”
- At first, I found this strange, since it is derived from the same root {{ 'נ-ב-א' | he: 'n-b-a’' }} as the nouns {{ 'נביא' | he: 'navi', 'prophet' }} and {{ 'נבואה' | he: 'n’voah',  'prophecy' }} – thus, I'd expect its translation as a verb to be “prophesying”. Some do translate it this way, such as the KJV, but most others seem to go with “speaking ecstatically” or “speaking in ecstasy.” The Everett Fox translation (which is the default on Sefaria for this book at the time of writing) seems to find a middle ground with “ranting-like-a-prophet.” But the question remains: Why translate it in such an expected way?
<!--more-->
- The argument seems to be that the root {{ 'נ-ב-א' | he: 'n-b-a’' }} in other Semitic languages relates to speech, and the act of “speaking ecstatically” under the influence of a divine spirit seemed was a common practice historically. To back this up, this verb is most often used in the context of musical instruments and/or someone being overcome with a divine spirit, as it is here. Thus, it’s likely that the group of {{ 'נביאים' | he: 'n’vi’im', 'prophets' }} referred to in this story are a group of strange zealots who regularly {{ 'התנבא' | he: 'hitnabe', 'speak ecstatically' }}. (Thus the derogatory connotation of: “Is Saul, too, among the prophets?”)
- However, the nail in the coffin that helped me accept this translation is that the verb is in the Hitpa’el stem, an uncommon verb form which is the reflexive form of the Pi’el stem. The Pi’el stem often intensifies and/or narrows the meaning of the root, for example: {{ 'שָׁבַר' | he: 'shavar', 'break' }} vs. {{ 'שִׁבֵּר' | he: 'shiber', 'shatter' }}. So, I find it believable that the intense and narrow meaning of “speaking ecstatically like a prophet” as compared to simply “prophesying” would work for the meaning of the Pi’el stem of {{ 'נ-ב-א' | he: 'n-b-a’' }}.
- I do wish Alter and others included a word etymologically elated to “prophecy” in English somewhere in their translation of this verb, though – just to link it to the many other times words derived from the root {{ 'נ-ב-א' | he: 'n-b-a’' }} are used in this section.

<!--break-->
- *Honorable mention:* Samuel's detailed instructions for Saul’s next steps underscore what I said in my [my notes on I Samuel 9]({% post_url nach-2024/I-Samuel/2024-03-25-9 %}) about Saul’s lack of agency. The fact that Saul has no recorded response to any of these instructions reinforces this even further.
- This crescendos by the end of this chapter, where he has to be called out by *Adonai* and dragged out of hiding among the gear to become ruler! This is the first indication that he actually *doesn’t* want to be ruler, rather than just being easily swayed.

<!--break-->
- *Honorable mention:* For a discussion about the meaning of {{ 'לכד' | he: 'lachad' }} in {{ 'I Samuel 10:21' | sefaria }} see [my notes on Joshua 7]({% post_url nach-2024/Joshua/2024-02-07-7 %}). 
