---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 2
verse: 6-7
enTitle: Striking Parallels to <i>Unetaneh Tokef</i>
tags: fav
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe יי מֵמִ֣ית וּמְחַיֶּ֑ה %}
{% vtl Adonai memit u’m’chayeh %}
{% vtr <i>Adonai</i> makes death and makes life, %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe מוֹרִ֥יד שְׁא֖וֹל וַיָּֽעַל׃ %}
{% vtl morid sh’ol vaya‘al. %}
{% vtr lowers to <i>She’ol</i> and brings up. %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe יי מוֹרִ֣ישׁ וּמַעֲשִׁ֑יר %}
{% vtl Adonai morish uma‘ashir %}
{% vtr <i>Adonai</i> makes poor and makes rich, %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe מַשְׁפִּ֖יל אַף־מְרוֹמֵֽם׃ %}
{% vtl mashpil af m’romem %}
{% vtr puts down yet raises up.  %}
{% endverses I Samuel 2:6-7 %}

- These beautiful lines remind me so much of the *Unetaneh Tokef* prayer said on *Rosh Hashanah*, the day on which these verses are read as a *Haftarah*. Specifically:

{% verses %}
{% vhe מִי יִחְיֶה וּמִי יָמוּת %}
{% vtl mi yichyeh umi yamut %}
{% vtr Who will live and who will die %}
{% brdotsverses %}
{% vhe מִי יַעֲנִי וּמִי יַעֲשִׁיר %}
{% vtl mi ya‘ani umi ya‘ashir %}
{% vtr Who will be made poor and who made rich %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe מִי יֻשְׁפַּל וּמִי יָרוּם %}
{% vtl mi yeshpal umi yarum %}
{% vtr Who will be put down and who lifted up %}
{% endverses Unetaneh Tokef 4 %}

<!--more-->
- Both follow strict poetic forms:
  - The former has exactly three words per each half-verse. Each half-verse contrasts two opposites, and corresponding half-verses mirrors each other's content: the first half-verses of 6 and 7 mirror one another gramatically, and the second half-verses of 6 and 7 mirror one another in meaning.
  - The latter follows the four-word structure form of: {{ 'מי [A] ומי [B]' | he: 'mi [A] umi [B]', 'Who [A] and who [B]' }}, where [A] and [B] are contrasting future-tense verbs.
- Both share much of the same vocabulary: {{ 'הֵמִית' | he: 'hemit', 'kill”, or literally, “make die' }}, {{ 'הֶחֱיָה' | he: 'hecheyah', 'revive”, or literally, “make live' }}, {{ 'הֶעֱשִׁיר' | he: 'he‘eshir', 'make rich' }}, and {{ 'הִשְׁפִּיל' | he: 'hishpil', 'put down”, or literally, “make low' }}. The two use different, but synonymous, words for “make poor.”
- All of this shared vocabulary (and, in fact, most of the verbs used) are verbs in the [*Hiphil* stem](https://uhg.readthedocs.io/en/latest/stem_hiphil.html) - a derived verb form which indicates causative action. The repeated use of this stem reinforces the message of these verses: that God causes all, the good and the bad.

<!--break-->
- I find the second half-verse of verse 6 fascinating. It could mean “lowers dead souls to *She’ol* and brings up new ones” or it could mean “lowers dead souls to *She’ol* and brings them, those souls, back up.” I'm not sure there's enough evidence to settle on one or the other, but the theological implications of the latter interpretation are many. Could this simply be referring to the promise of restoring souls to dead bodies in the messianic age, or could it be referring to *She’ol* being a temporary place even before then? In the second temple period *She’ol* was thought of as a place of punishment, although it likely originally referred to the place where all dead souls went. The sages of the Talmud seemed to favor the interpretation that *She’ol* was a place of punishment, but indeed one which always carries a finite sentence (at most one year).[^1]

[^1]: [“Heaven and Hell in Jewish Tradition“ by Rabbi Or N. Rose, My Jewish Learning](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/heaven-and-hell-in-jewish-tradition/)
