---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 1
heTitle: צבאות
tlTitle: Tz’vaot
enTitle: and Personal Prayer
tags: fav
---

- The story of Hannah ({{ 'I Samuel 1:1-2:10' | sefaria }}) is read every year as the [*Haftarah*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Haftara) for *Rosh Hashanah*, the Jewish New Year. Thus, I've heard this story, and speeches about it, many times. And so, because of these decades of interpretations and important perspectives in my head, I'm finding that I have so many things I want to say about this chapter. Here are just two of them:

- {{ 'יי צבאות' | he: "Adonai Tz’vaot" }} is an extremely common name of God in both the *Tanakh* and Jewish liturgy, but surprisingly is not used a single time until right here all the way in {{ 'I Samuel 1:3' | sefaria }}. The first time it's spoken is also in this story, as the opening words of Hannah's prayer in {{ 'I Samuel 1:11' | sefaria }}.
<!--more-->
- Robert Alter translates it as “<span class="small-caps">Lord</span> of Armies,” as {{ 'צבא' | he: 'tzava' }} is indeed the Hebrew word used to mean “army.” However, the word more broadly means “assembly” (as a verb it means “to assemble” or “to go forth as an assembly”), or just simply “multitude,” which leads to its most common English translation: “<span class="small-caps">Lord</span> of Hosts” or “<i>Adonai</i> of Hosts.”
- I've also seen this translated as “<i>Adonai</i> of Heavenly Hosts,” reflecting the traditional interpretation that the {{ 'צבאות' | he: "tz’vaot" }} being referred to in this title are the {{ 'צבאות' | he: "tz’vaot" }} of heaven: the heavenly armies of which God is the commander – or the multitudes of angels of which God is the Most High, depending on your interpretation.
- However, in the context of Hannah's story that isn't what I think she's referring to. What makes me say this is the fact that to {{ 'יי צבאות' | he: "Adonai Tz’vaot" }}, Hannah prays for a child. Thus, it is not the multitudes in heaven to which she refers, but the multitudes of *us*, God's creations. To me, I hear Hannah saying: “God who has made such multitudes of creations, please, make for me just one.”

<!--more-->
- I've heard it said before that Hannah was the first person to ever truly pray. Even more times than that, I've heard the less dramatic statement that Hannah's prayer serves as a model for how to pray. Certainly, almost every aspect of this prayer is something that I was taught in Hebrew School – and with some basic research it seems that indeed the Jewish laws on proper prayer were derived by examining the different aspects of this story.[^1] Even the fact that God does not reply to Hannah, but instead just silently listens and only later remembers her and acts, I saw discussed as something that this story models.
- However, one thing I haven't heard much discussion about before today, was the idea that this serves as a model for *personal* prayer, as opposed to prayer being an institutionalized action done only by high priests in a centralized temple.
- This was one of the core disagreements of the period of Jewish Sectarianism which ended the Second Temple period: with the Pharisees (the ideological progenitors of all modern Jews) rejecting the Sadducees' (the high priests') claim that only through them can a Jew connect with God. Early Christians appeared to take this a step further, and rejected the Pharisees’ hierarchy of teachers (rabbis) in favor of an entirely personal religious practice.
- One article I found[^2] cited the following imagined continuation of Hannah's rejection of the priest Eli in {{ 'I Samuel 1:15' | sefaria }}. This passage from the Talmud, in my opinion, exemplifies the extent to which the Pharisees and Early Christians during this period rejected the priesthood and embraced Hannah's model of prayer. The Talmudic writers imagine Hannah continuing {{ 'לֹא אֲדוֹנִי' | he: nil, 'No, my lord' }} with:

{% verses %}
{% vhe לֹא אָדוֹן אַתָּה בְּדָבָר זֶה, %}
{% vtr – you are not a lord in this thing, %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe וְלֹא רוּחַ הַקּוֹדֶשׁ שׁוֹרָה עָלֶיךָ %}
{% vtr and the Holy Spirit does not rest on you %}
{% endverses Berakhot 31b:1 %}

[^1]: [“Hannah: Midrash and Aggadah” by Tamar Kadari, Jewish Women's Archive](https://jwa.org/encyclopedia/article/hannah-midrash-and-aggadah#pid-13236)
[^2]: [“Hannah’s Prayer” by Rachel Adler, My Jewish Learning](https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/hannahs-prayer/)