---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 16
enTitle: David Also Lacks Agency (So Far)
---

- Surprisingly, David does not appear to be much of a contrast to Saul so far. Yes, he is not tall and strapping like Saul (or like his eldest brother, who Samuel initially gets excited about), but his looks are still a key feature. However, the most striking similarity is that they both lack agency. (I discussed Saul's lack of agency in [my notes on I Samuel 9]({% post_url nach-2024/I-Samuel/2024-03-25-9 %})).
- So far we have not heard David speak, he is simply moved around by his father or by Samuel or by Saul with no apparent agency or opinions of his own.
<!--more-->
- In fact, as Alter points out, in {{ 'I Samuel 16:20' | sefaria }} he brings the exact items Samuel told Saul to bring in his elaborate instructions in {{ 'I Samuel 10:3' | sefaria }} – further reinforcing that, at least for now, this new king is starting out very much in the vein of the previous. (In fact, I’d argue with even *less* agency – although the story has just started.)

<!--break-->
- *Honorable Mention:* First reference to an evil spirit? There are messengers (angels) of God who do destructive acts, but this appears to be the first reference to an evil spirit directly interfacing with a person without an abundantly clear connection to God.
- Of course, the word {{ 'רוח' | he: 'ruach', 'spirit' }} here could just be “spirit” in the sense of a “feeling” or “state of being” rather than in the sense of an entity – in the same way as the {{ 'רוח' | he: 'ruach', 'spirit' }} of God descends on prophets and judges, for example. However, my understanding is that the idea of additional divine entities with their own agency will appear more and more as we progress through these books.
