---
layout: post
includeStatement: 1
book: I Samuel
chapter: 5
verse: 6
enTitle: Divergent Traditions of an Affliction
tag: fav
---

{% verses %}
{% vhe וַיַּ֤ךְ אֹתָם֙ %}
{% vtl vayach otam %}
{% vtr and He struck them %}
{% brverses %}
{% vhe (בעפלים) [בַּטְּחֹרִ֔ים] %}
{% vtl (ba‘ofalim) [ba’t’chorim] %}
{% vtr (with tumors) [with hemorrhoids] %}
{% endverses I Samuel 5:6 %}

- Fluent speakers of Hebrew, both historically and in the modern day, neither use nor need vowel markings (the small dots and lines surrounding the Hebrew letters above). These diacritics were first added in roughly the 5th century CE by the Masorites, a group of scholars interested in precisely preserving the pronunciation and grammar of the text.
- Sometimes, the Masorites encountered a word which was written one way, but pronounced entirely differently in the tradition of oral recitation. For example, the text of this chapter reads {{ 'בעפלים' | he: 'ba‘ofalim', 'with tumors' }}, but in oral recitation, the tradition is to say {{ 'בטחרים' | he: 'ba’t’chorim', 'with hemorrhoids' }}. To resolve this, the Masorites include both: the written version without markings (in parentheses above) and the spoken version with markings (in square brackets above).
- Usually, the tradition of oral recitation is able to preserve the true meaning of a word when a mistake in scribal transcription causes a word in the written text to change. However, in this case, the scholarly consensus appears to be that the written text is correct, and the oral tradition is the one that diverged.

<!--more-->
- As both Alter and the medieval Jewish commentator Rashi (see [Rashi on I Samuel 5:6](https://www.sefaria.org/Rashi_on_I_Samuel.5.6.2)) mention, the affliction referred to is most likely the bubonic plague, which can cause rectal tumors easily mistakable with hemorrhoids.
- This interpretation is backed up by the Septuagint: a Greek translation of the *Tanakh* which predates any surviving complete Hebrew manuscript. Because of its earlier date, the Septuagint often contains aspects of the text which were lost before the any of the surviving Hebrew manuscripts were written. In this case, the part of this verse referenced above is replaced with a reference to mice, the bearers of the bubonic plague:

<div class="verses"><table><tbody><tr>
<td class="greek">καὶ ἐξέζεσεν αὐτοῖς εἰς τὰς ναῦς καὶ μέσον τῆς χώρας αὐτῆς ἀνεφύησαν μύες</td>
<td class="en">and it burst out upon them into the ships, and mice sprang up in the midst of their country</td>
</tr></tbody></table><div class="verses-attrib">
<a href="https://biblebento.com/index.html?lxx1i&90.5.6">I Samuel 5:6 LXX</a> (<a href="https://biblehub.com/sep/1_samuel/5.htm">Brenton's Septuagint Translation</a>)
</div></div>

- I find these wildly divergent traditions fascinating. My take is that this is simply a difficult and disgusting story, and different communities and traditions wrangled with it in different ways.
